
* Title

Clustering-Aided Tractography Segmentation


* Authors

Paolo Avesani
Thien Bao Nguyen
Emanuele Olivetti
Eleftherios Garyfallidis
Nivedita Agarwal


* Abstract

In this work we present a novel 3D interactive software system to
support neuroscientists and neuroanatomists in exploring and
segmenting the white matter of the human brain reconstructed by
diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (dMRI) techniques.

Within the white matter, the local quantification of the diffusion
process of the water molecules provides in vivo information on the
directionality of the neuronal axons. Reconstruction and tracking
algorithms transform this information into streamlines, i.e. 3D
polylines approximating the neuronal pathways. Then, the hundreds of
thousands of streamlines that can be reconstructed from a single brain
represent its anatomical connectivity structure.

The clinical literature indicates that a wide range of pathologies,
such as multiple sclerosis and the Alzheimer disease, induce
degenerative processes in the white matter of the brain. The
disruption of the anatomical connectivity is part of these effects and
for this reason, such diseases may be investigated through inspection
and analysis of tractography data. A necessary step in this direction
is to unveil the anatomical structures of interest hidden within the
whole brain tractography, a task called tract segmentation.

The literature and the software tools available for tract segmentation
describe two main approaches: manual segmentation and automatic
segmentation. In the first approach an expert defines regions of
interest (ROIs) within the brain and filters out the streamlines not
crossing those regions. In the second approach clustering algorithms
attempt to group the streamlines according only to their geometric
properties. Manual segmentation is time consuming for the expert and
it is based on the assumption that the reconstruction of streamlines
is highly accurate. Conversely, automatic segmentation exclude the
expert from the process and for this reason may have limited adoption
in the clinical domain.

We propose a novel approach based on the notion of computer-assisted
tract segmentation. The process of segmentation is driven by the
expert but at the same time efficient clustering techniques are
exploited in order to dynamically create a simplified representation
of the large set of streamlines presented on the screen. The first key
element of this approach is to cluster the streamlines and then to
show just one representative of each cluster instead of them. In this
way the expert is presented with a 3D scene that balances an accurate
representation with the possibility user interaction.

The second key element of this approach is to let the expert directly
select the clusters of interest by pointing and clicking on their
representative streamlines. In this way the expert segments the
anatomical structures of interest by selecting the streamlines having
shape and location compliant with the target anatomical
structure. This is different from the ROI-based approach in which
there is no direct selection of the streamlines.

Once the expert selects the few clusters of interest the remaining
ones are removed from the scene. Then the subset of streamlines of the
few selected clusters is then re-clustered into a larger number of
clusters, thus revealing more anatomical details. The expert then
selects the cluster of interest. The steps of re-clustering and manual
selection are repeated iteratively until the expert is confident of
having segmented the anatomical structure of interest.

We validated the approach implemented in the tool on data from a
clinical study about the Amyotropic Lateral Syndrome (ALS), where an
expert neuroanatomist segmented the corticospinal tract of patients
and healthy subjects. We include the tractography data of one patient
and one subject of this study in the distribution of the software.

The software tool is implemented in Python, on top of NumPy, OpenGL, DiPy and
Scikit-Learn. It is currently in alpha/beta stage and we plan to
release it for the submission of this article.





